changes to chapter 3. Raw data processing (#327)
theislab/single-cell-best-practices: jupyter-book/glossary.md

# Glossary

```{glossary}
Adapter sequences
adapter sequences
    Short, synthetic DNA or RNA sequences that are ligated to the ends of DNA or RNA fragments during library preparation for sequencing.
    These adapters are essential for binding the fragments to the flowcell and enabling amplification and sequencing.
    However, if adapters are not properly removed or trimmed after sequencing, they can appear in the reads, potentially interfering with alignment and downstream analyses.

Algorithm
Algorithms
    A pre-defined set of instructions to solve a problem.

AnnData
AnnDatas

>     A Python package for annotated data matrices.

Reviewer: Should we provide a link to the AnnData docs here? We should explain in 1-2 sentences the main feature of AnnData. Basically a matrix that can be annotated on the observation and feature level, sliced, stored to disk as h5ad, zarr etc. In an understandable manner haha.

    The primary data structure used in the scverse ecosystem.

> Backtrace

Reviewer: Not sure whether we need this glossary item. Looks like bioinformatics course PTSD though hahhaaha

Barcode
Barcodes
Bar code
Bar codes
    Short DNA barcode fragments ("tags") that are used to identify reads originating from the same cell.
    Reads are later grouped by their barcode during raw data processing steps.

Batch effect
    Technical confounding factors in an experiment that cause dataset distribution shifts.
    Usually lead to inaccurate conclusions if the causes of the batch effects are correlated with outcomes of interest in an experiment and should be accounted for (usually removed).

Benchmark
    An (independent) comparison of performance of several tools with respect to pre-defined metrics.

Bulk RNA sequencing
    Contrary to single-cell sequencing, bulk sequencing measures the average expression values of several cells.
    Therefore, resolution is lost, but bulk sequencing is usually cheaper, less laborious and faster to analyze.

Cell
    The fundamental unit of life.
    Consists of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane that contains many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
    Cells acquire specific functions, transition to cell types, divide, communicate and keep the organism going.

>     Learning about the structure, activity and communication of cells helps deciphering biology.

Reviewer: Maybe make this more precise? Not just `deciphering biology`. Maybe we can mention 1-3 use cases here such as gene expression dynamics, cellular trajectories and lineages, ...

DNA
    DNA is the acronym of Deoxyribonucleic acid.
    It is the organic chemical storing hereditary information and instructions for protein synthesis.
    DNA gets transcribed into {term}`RNA`.

Doublets
    Reads obtained from droplet based assays might be mistakenly associated to a single cell while the RNA expression origins from two or more cells (a doublet).

Downstream analysis
downstream analyses
    A phase of data analysis that follows the initial processing of raw data.
    In the context of scRNA-seq, this includes tasks such as normalization, integration, filtering, cell type identification, trajectory inference, and studying expression dynamics.

Dropout
    A gene with low expression that is observed in one cell, but not in other cells of the same {term}`cell type`.
    The reason for dropouts are commonly low amounts of mRNA expression in cells and the general stochasticity of mRNA expression.
    Dropouts are one of the reasons why scRNA-seq data is sparse.

Drop-seq
    A protocol for scRNA-seq that separates cells into nano-liter sized aqueous droplets enabling large-scale profiling.

Edit distance

>     Edit distance (often referring to Levenshtein distance) measures the minimum number of operations (Substitution, Insertion, Deletion) required to transform one string into another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Edit distance (often referred to as Levenshtein distance) measures the minimum number of operations (Substitution, Insertion, Deletion) required to transform one string into another.
```

FASTQ reads
    Sequencing reads that are saved in the FASTQ format.
    FASTQ files are then used to map against the reference genome of interest to obtain gene counts for cells.

Flowcell
flowcell

>     A consumable device used in sequencing platforms, such as those from Illumina, where DNA or RNA fragments are sequenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A consumable device used in sequencing platforms where DNA or RNA fragments are sequenced.
```

    Unlike DNA, RNA can be highly dynamic, acting as a messenger (mRNA) to carry genetic instructions, a structural or catalytic component (rRNA, snRNA), or a regulator of gene expression (miRNA, siRNA, lncRNA).
    RNA plays a central role in transcription, translation, and cellular responses, making it essential for understanding gene regulation, development, and disease.

RT-qPCR
    Quantitative reverse transcription {term}`PCR` (RT-qPCR) monitors the amplification of a targeted {term}`DNA` molecule during the PCR.

scanpy
    A Python package for single-cell analysis in Python by scverse.

scverse
    A consortium for fundamental single-cell tools in the life sciences that are maintaining computational analysis tools like scanpy, muon and scvi-tools.
    See: https://scverse.org/

signal-to-noise ratio
    A measure of the clarity of a signal relative to background noise.
    In sequencing, the signal represents the detectable information derived from the DNA or RNA molecules being sequenced, while the noise includes random errors or unwanted signals that can obscure or distort the true data.

>     A high SNR indicates that the signal is strong and reliable compared to the noise, resulting in better data quality.

Reviewer: This glossary item didn't introduce the SNR acronym right?

Author: I'll add it to it

    Sequence of DNA to which proteins bind to initiate and control transcription.

Pseudotime
    Latent and therefore unobserved dimension reflecting cells' progression through transitions.
    Pseudotime is usually related to real time events, but not necessarily the same.

RNA

>     Ribonucleic acid. Single-stranded nucleic acid present in all living cells that encodes and regulates gene expression.

Reviewer: I think this is super fundamental and we can add 1-2 sentences of additional detail here.

RT-qPCR

>     Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) monitors the amplification of a targeted {term}`DNA` molecule during the PCR.

Reviewer: Should we link normal PCR here?
